00:00:00,160 --> 00:03:57,280 [Speaker 0]
Welcome back, everyone. And if this is the 1st time for you here, welcome. As we speak, over 10,000 people across India are participating in the Changemakers World Cup. And what gets me most excited is all of them are solving real problems in their schools, in their communities, in their neighborhood, and the top 3 will be invited for an all-expense-paid trip to the One Young World Impact Summit at the United Nations. So maybe you already started mission 2 or are about to. Well, I want to make sure that you save a lot of time. Every year, again and again, students ask the same question, and I'm sure that's also in your mind. What are the judges actually looking for? Do bigger projects win? No. Do students working the hardest win? Maybe. Now, let me tell you, if I was the judge, how will I look at your project? Number one, how many people did you actually spoke to? So what I'm trying to do here is, how did you really understand the problem? Did you talk to people? Did you assume it? Or did you just come up with a solution without really knowing what's happening on the field? So talking to people really gives us evidence that you have curated the problem and the solution with your community. Number 2, did you solve the cause or you just kind of addressed just the symptoms? Imagine your school throws away thousands of disposable spoons every day. Now, one student collects all these spoons and disposes them off properly, or maybe recycles them. Good project, right? Now, let's look at another student who convinces the canteen to stop using disposable spoons altogether. Now, that's a great project because one student addressed the symptoms, whereas the other students really addresses the cause. Now, you may not be able to address and do this in every case. Try to address the cause and not the symptom. Now, 3rd is how much impact you created compared to the amount of work you did. Now, imagine 2 students again. One will spend an entire month collecting plastic bottles, and the other student convinces the school to put up refilling stations so that students stop buying plastic bottles altogether. So who created more impact? Probably student 2, because changemaking is not only about just working harder. Ask yourself, what is the simplest action that can create the biggest change? 4th, will your project continue after you're gone? Suppose you leave your school tomorrow, you graduate out. Will your project continue when you're gone, or will it just disappear? Maybe your teachers adopt it, maybe your principal makes it as a school policy, maybe your juniors take your project and just continue the momentum that you created. That's where you've gone from a simple project to actually creating a movement, and that's what excites a judge. 5th, can someone else copy your idea? Well, uh, this might sound counterintuitive, but believe me, simpler is better. The best ideas don't stay in one classroom. They are so simple and practical that anybody can build on it. So maybe a school can copy it next week and another school the following week. Well, if it works in your school, it's a great project. But if it can be in other schools and many people can copy it, you have created a movement. And frankly, here's most students do, uh, knowingly and unknowingly. Don't tell us you made 10 posters, 1000 posters. Tell us what those posters actually did and the impact they created. Don't tell us the awareness sessions that you did. Well, that's important, but what is more important is tell us what your awareness sessions really created. What was the shift that happened because you conducted those awareness sessions? So before you submit your project, think about these points that we just discussed in this video. And good luck. I can't wait to see what you guys come up with and what you guys build, what change you create. Till then, happy changemaking. [music crescendos]